That knowledge of those psychological
principles can be used for
good or can be used for evil.
And that's where dark patterns come in,
this idea of manipulating
people with psychology.
So just because we're talking about
psychology and an understanding of
people doesn't mean automatically that
we move into the world of dark patterns.
And I wanna address this issue of dark
patterns because there are good reasons
to avoid them.
Now, you might not have come across
the term dark patterns before, so
let me just take a few minutes to
explain what dark patterns are.
And then we'll look at why you
really should be avoiding them.
So I define dark patterns as user
interface elements that have been
carefully crafted to trick users into
doing things they might not otherwise do,
often by means of psychological
manipulation, okay?
And I can sum all of this up with this
mock up that I've produced, okay?
So this mock up,
basically is a typical e-commerce site,
is trying to sell a pair of shoes, right?
But obviously all good e-commerce sites
wanna increase the average order value.
They want people to spend more with them.
So one way that a company might decide it
wants to go about increasing the value
it makes from people buying these
shoes is to sell them insurance for
their shoes, all right?
Absolutely ridiculous, who wants
insurance for their shoes, right?
But I could easily encourage
somebody to do it.
I could basically manipulate somebody to
adding insurance to their shoes whether
they wanted it or not.
And that's exactly what
this interface does, right?
If you look at this interface,
everything in you cries,
if I want these shoes,
I need to hit that green button, okay?
There are a loads of visual
indicators that show that that is
the right button to click.
For a start, it's got an arrow
that points to the right and
that for us in western countries
that read from left to right,
is a sign of onwards, move forward, right?
So that logically feels
like the next thing to do.
Add to the fact that it's bright green and
green,
again in western society, is a color
that we associate heavily with go,
so that then indicates you move forward.
Now, but there is actually
another button right next to it.
And the other button looks like it's been
grayed out, that it's not selectable.
And it's also pointing backwards.
But this is the moment that you're
giving somebody a choice, right?
If you could read the copy on the buttons,
which by the way, I've purposely
made hard to read because I don't want
people reading it if I want to manipulate.
We've got add to basket with
insurance on the green button and
add to basket without insurance
on the grayed out button.
So in other words,
I can easily trick somebody into
doing something that I want them to.
And we see these kinds of techniques,
various psychological techniques
being used all the time.
So this particular technique
is relying on the fact
that we favor system 1 over system 2.
In other words, we're not consciously
thinking about which button to click on.
Instead, we're intuitively going to the
button based on our previous experiences
that green is good.
That arrows to the right are onwards.
And so we're just going through without
actually thinking about it was system 2.
So that's the particular strain of
psychology that's being used there.
But there are actually lots of
different techniques that can be used.
So, you see, for example,
things like this all the time.
So I don't know whether
you've ever used Etsy before.
But Etsy sells kind of one-off
handcrafted goods, all right?
And this particular one which is
a vintage lamp that looks like a shotgun.
Cuz why not, well,
let's buy one of those today, shall we?
This is a handmade one-off item and
actually if you've read the overview
description of it,
it says that it's a handmade item.
Yet Etsy really wanna
obviously encourage sales.
So what they then do
alongside that is they say,
almost gone, there's only one item left.
Well, of course there's only one
item left, they're handmade and
made to order, right?
So there's only ever gonna be one left,
but they really emphasized that.
And they also say not only
that's our only one left,
there's three people who've
added this to their cart.
It's gonna go any minute now because
three people have added it to their cart.
And worst still 63 people have
favorited this item, right?
So what they're doing there is they're
tapping into your primal brain,
that part of you that goes, I want to
hoard things, I don't wanna miss out,
what if this is no longer available?
And so that makes you want to buy.
Now you sit there and you go,
I'll hoard of course.
Of course, I know this,
I know they're trying to manipulate me but
we'll come on to that in just a minute.
So as you can see, we're surrounded
by this all the time, right?
The guys here I've come across from
the states to the UK to film this
particular one.
And I bet they booked their hotel
room with something like booking.com.
And booking.com,
they smother their website with
these kinds of scarcity thing.
This room's almost sold out,
there's an exclusive deal that's
gonna expire at any minute.
All of these things encouraged us to act,
but actually they're bad for business.
But most of the conversations you read
online about this kind of manipulation,
these dark patterns, position it in
this way, that it's unethical or
irresponsible to use these dark patterns,
okay?
And I only take issue with this approach,
not that it's inaccurate,
it's absolutely true.
I do believe that it's unethical and
irresponsible to use dark patterns.
But my problem with making
the argument in that way is that,
a, it puts peoples' backs up.
So you might be working in a company,
right, or you might have a client, and
your client, or your stakeholders might
suggest some of these techniques.
If you turn around to them and
say they're unethical,
what you're basically saying to them
is you're an unethical person, right?
And nobody wants to be told that.
So you're just gonna put their
backs up and annoy them.
On top of which ethics is very
much open to interpretation, okay?
So if you are a marketing manager,
you're under enormous pressure
to increase conversion rate.
You can justify anything in your head.
So, if we go back to this screen for
a moment and look at this design.
I could justify this to myself ethically,
after all I'm giving them a choice.
They don't have to have the insurance,
it's right there in black and white.